---
layout: post
title: "A Peek Through the Clouds"
date: 2022-11-14
author: Drew Millane 
description: Exploratory data analysis on weather in Provo
image: https://miro.medium.com/max/800/1*swBI4_YaHnMIwOvz3rGuFQ.jpeg
---
 
# Introduction 
 
John Tukey once said, “The greatest value of a picture is when it forces us to notice what we never expected to see.” There is something beautiful about taking a hodgepodge of data and transforming it into a story. What we could not see is now unveiled for us to discover and ask more questions. In other words, exploratory data analysis propels curiosity and discovery. Excitedly, this power can be harnessed with a few lines of code. 

As discussed in my previous blog post, weather patterns have a major impact on all we do, especially in this time of drought. With the scraped data we get to split the clouds and explore! In this post, I have shared five graphics that help display patterns in our dataset, each with a question in mind. Let’s begin! 

# How much precipitation did Provo get this year? 

The graph below displays the amount of precipitation Provo received in inches starting at the beginning of this year. From what we can see at first glance it hasn’t rained very much here in Provo. The highest is 0.6 inches per hour, which is considered heavy rainfall. What is surprising is that occurred during June, not in April which I would have assumed the heaviest rainfall to be at. It appears that rainfall occurs most often during March through April and September through October, ranging from light to moderate rainfall. What would be interesting to see is comparing this graph to another state like Oregon and comparing rainfall occurrence and how severe. 


# What is the trend of temperature for this year?

This graph is another line plot that displays the temperature over time. As expected, the temperature overall goes up as we get closer to summer and is starting to decrease as we approach winter. What is interesting is the variability of temperature from January to June. It varies a lot between these two months, but the variability starts to decrease after June and stays consistent. Why is that? I’m curious to see if the years past follows this pattern of variability. 


# Is there a relationship between cloud cover and precipitation? 

To answer this question, I created a scatter plot to see if there was a relationship between the amount of cloud cover and precipitation. My intuition suspected that the more cloud cover the more rain there would be. From the graph, there seems to be a weak positive relationship. Higher rainfalls are occurring more with higher cloud cover, but not enough to say there is a strong relationship. 

# Is there a relationship between windspeed and the difference between temperature and feels like temperature?

For this scatterplot, I created a new variable that took the difference between the actual temperature to what it felt like. This was done so that I could see whether windspeed increased the difference between the two. From this plot, there appears to be a weak positive relationship. I’m curious to see if this correlation would change if had more data. 


# Overall, what are the relationships between variables?

To get an overall idea of the correlation of the variables in the dataset, I selected the ones I found most important and created a heatmap of those variables. There appears to be 






